JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight,
we are on the ground in
Brussels. The city
grapples with the deadly attacks
and the most
effective way to fight terror.
MALCOLM BRABANT: There is a mix
of fear and
resilience on the streets here
tonight, as
Belgians shift focus to
confronting extremism
in their midst.
GWEN IFILL: Then: foreign policy
and the next
president, today, the Democrats.
Hillary Clinton
delivers a major address. And we
talk with
Bernie Sanders.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Can ISIS be destroyed? Of course
they can.
It's a question of the
coalition. It's a question,
as King Abdullah has said,
Muslim troops on
the ground, not American troops.
And, by the
way, it is not a question of
going to war
against a religion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we travel to
the Philippines,
where young girls are lured into
the sex trade
online.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The city of
Brussels began
three days of mourning today; 31
people were
killed and 270 others wounded in
Tuesday's
suicide attacks.
Today, investigators kept up a
manhunt, as
the city tried to get back to
something like
normal.
Malcolm Brabant reports from
Brussels.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Hundreds
gathered in Brussels'
Place de la Bourse this morning
to remember
the victims of yesterday's twin
bombings with
a moment of silence.
WOMAN: Well, I think everyone
can agree that
this is a horrible, horrible,
horrible thing.
I think that's all there is left
to say about
it.
CAROLINE LEDENT, Brussels
Resident (through
translator): I think we had to
be here. I
don't have the words to express
what I feel,
but it's true that we have been
used to see
these attacks for a long time,
but when it
happens at home, you feel it in
a stronger
way.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Elsewhere in
the city, flags
at European Union buildings were
lowered to
half-staff. European leaders
laid a wreath
at the metro station where one
of the bombers
struck, and Belgium's king and
queen visited
with staff and emergency
responders at the
Brussels Airport, which
announced it will
remain closed at least another
day.
Many others in the Belgian
capital took pride
in returning to work and routine
as a sign
of strength in the face of
terror.
WOMAN: We all have to, because,
otherwise,
I think they will win. That's
what they want,
to paralyze our lives in Europe,
and we have
to go on with it.
WOMAN: We shouldn't be afraid. I
think the
most straight answer is to be
there, to continue
our lives, to go to the
terraces, to drink
our coffee, to go to the cinema
and so on.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But, as life
went on, so
did the search for answers.
Investigators
now believe at least four
individuals were
involved in the attacks.
They say Ibrahim El Bakraoui and
another man
seen were the suicide bombers
who struck the
departures concourse. That
second man, Najim
Laachraoui, allegedly also made
the suicide
vests for the Paris bombings.
And it was El Bakraoui's
brother, Khalid,
who blew himself up on a subway
car near the
European Union complex about an
hour later.
The third man, not yet
identified from the
airport photo, is still being
sought.
FREDERIC VAN LEEUW, Belgian
Federal Prosecutor
(through translator): The third
suspect wearing
a light jacket and a hat is on
the run. He
put down a large bag, then left
before the
explosion. It contained the
largest explosive
charge. Shortly after the
arrival of the bomb
disposal unit, this bag blew up
because of
the highly unstable nature of
the explosives.
Fortunately, nobody was injured.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Officials say
the two brothers
did have criminal records tied
to robbery
and carjacking, but it wasn't
until a March
15 raid on a Belgium apartment
rented by Khalid
El Bakraoui that they became
suspects in the
ongoing terror probe.
That search also turned up
fingerprints belonging
to Salah Abdeslam, the top
suspect in November's
terror attacks in Paris. He was
captured last
week. One of several raids since
yesterday's
attacks turned up explosives and
chemicals
used to make bombs, as well as
Ibrahim El
Bakraoui's computer on which he
said he was
unsure what to do, hunted
everywhere, and
no longer safe.
Today, Turkish President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan
said one of the attackers was
deported from
Turkey in June.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): We informed the
Belgium Embassy
with a diplomatic note about the
deportation
on July 14, 2015. Despite our
warnings that
this person is a foreign
fighter, Belgium
could not establish any links
with terrorism.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Likewise,
French officials
have complained that Belgium
failed to conduct
security crackdowns in Muslim
areas after
the Paris attacks. French Prime
Minister Manuel
Valls called for greater
coordination today,
before traveling to Brussels.
MANUEL VALLS, French Prime
Minister (through
translator): We closed our eyes
everywhere
in Europe, including France, to
the progression
of extremist ideas,
neighborhoods which through
a combination of drug
trafficking and radical
Islamism perverted youth. And
I'm not here
to lecture the Belgians, because
I'm sure
they're more than aware of this.
MALCOLM BRABANT: There was also
word that
Secretary of State John Kerry
will travel
to Brussels on Friday to meet
with top Belgian
and European officials.
And, tonight, European and Iraqi
intelligence
officials told the Associated
Press that ISIS
has dispatched at least 400
fighters to Europe,
and they have been specifically
trained to
attack the West -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Malcolm,
given the threat
of these fighters, give us a
sense of the
security across Europe. You
traveled into
Belgium today.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Yes, I have
come from Lesbos
in Greece, and have traveled
through Athens
and Paris.
And all the way along that
route, you can
see just how sensitive people
are in the wake
of these attacks at transport
hubs. At Athens
Airport, for example, today,
there was an
alarm going off, and you could
see the tension
in people's faces because they
just didn't
know what was going on.
In Paris, the plane was met by
policemen checking
very assiduously everybody's
passports. And
this is something that shouldn't
normally
happen within the Schengen free
travel zone.
This is supposed to be
paper-free. But they
were checking everybody's
identities very
closely.
Indeed, there were sniffer dogs
there. And
then driving into Belgium wasn't
a problem.
The border was wide open, but on
the other
side of the motorway, it was
very difficult
getting out. There were hordes
of policemen
on the border with France trying
to see if
they could get hold of those
people that might
be involved in those attacks
yesterday.
And when I finally got into the
center of
Belgium, into Brussels this
morning -- this
afternoon, rather, at the
Eurostar station,
it looked very much like this
was a city at
war. There were army trucks
everywhere, police
guards, and people checking --
being checked
as they went into the Eurostar
station, because
this is something that people
really are concerned
about, that, in order to get
into these places
now, you perhaps need to be
checked.
And then there was a queue
outside. And these
are the sort of things that can
become soft
targets in the future. So,
there's a real
difficulty about the balance of
security in
places like Eurostar, train
station and at
airports.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Malcolm,
you reported on Turkey having
deported back
to Belgium one of the attackers
from what
happened yesterday. How do
Belgians explain
this?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Well, this is
really embarrassing
for the Belgians, because the
Turkish president
said that the Belgian
authorities were warned
that this man did have terrorist
links, and
he said that the Belgians had
not been able
to find any.
And yet this man was able to
wander around
in Belgium for months before
carrying out
this terrible suicide attack.
And it really
does beg the question about what
the European
authorities are going to do
about people who
return from Syria, especially as
this is where
they're getting the military
expertise to
be able to carry out the sort of
attacks that
we saw in Brussels yesterday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Malcolm Brabant
reporting for
us tonight from Brussels, we
thank you.
And we will take a closer look
at Europe's
struggle to prevent this sort of
attack after
the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: President
Obama defended his
administration's strategy
against terror, and dismissed
Republican calls
for more aggressive action.
The president spoke in Buenos
Aires, where
he met with President Mauricio
Macri. At a
news conference, he said
fighting the Islamic
State group is his number one
priority.
But he rejected Donald Trump's
calls for water-boarding
and Ted Cruz's talk of major
military strikes.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
So, when I hear we somebody
saying we should
carpet-bomb Iraq or Syria, not
only is that
inhumane, not only is that
contrary to our
values, but that would likely be
an extraordinary
mechanism for ISIL to recruit
more people
willing to die and explode bombs
in an airport.
GWEN IFILL: Mr. Obama also
condemned Cruz's
call for surveillance of Muslim
neighborhoods.
He said it would be wrong and --
quote -- "un-American
to make Muslims feel
ghettoized."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump was
off the campaign
trail today, but Ted Cruz was in
New York
City, where he fired back at the
president.
After a rally in Manhattan, Cruz
branded the
Obama policy a failure, and said
Americans
are fed up with being -- quote
-- "lectured
on Islamophobia."
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
We have seen President Obama's
weakness and
appeasement give rise to radical
Islamic terrorism.
ISIS, which President Obama
wrongfully dismissed
as the junior varsity, is the
face of evil.
They have declared jihad on
America and President
Obama refuses to acknowledge
that. He is so
captured by political
correctness, he's unwilling
to confront it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, Cruz
picked up
the endorsement of former rival
Jeb Bush,
after winning Tuesday's
Republican caucuses
in Utah. But Donald Trump won
the Arizona
primary, to pad his delegate
lead. On the
Democratic side, Hillary Clinton
won Arizona,
and Bernie Sanders won caucuses
in Utah and
Idaho.
We will hear some of Clinton's
speech on foreign
policy today, and have an
interview with Senator
Sanders later in the program.
GWEN IFILL: House Speaker Paul
Ryan decried
the state of politics and the
presidential
campaign today in a Washington
speech. The
Wisconsin Republican named no
names, but his
remarks appeared pointed
directly at front-runner
Donald Trump.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
This has always been a tough
business. And
when passions flare, ugliness is
sometimes
inevitable. But we shouldn't
accept ugliness
as the norm. We should demand
better from
ourselves. We should demand
better from one
another. We are slipping into
being a divisive
country.
We are speaking to each other in
echo chambers,
where we only talk to those who
agree with
us, and we think that there is
something wrong
with the people who don't agree
with us.
GWEN IFILL: Ryan has said he
will back the
eventual Republican presidential
nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's word that
most of the
warring parties in Yemen have
agreed to a
cease-fire as of April 10. A
special U.N.
envoy says it involves the
government and
its Sunni backers, including
Saudi Arabia,
plus Shiite rebels. Meanwhile,
local officials
confirm that a U.S. airstrike
killed some
50 militants at an al-Qaida
training camp
west of the port city of Mukalla
on Tuesday.
GWEN IFILL: An independent task
force in Michigan
blasted state officials today
for mishandling
the water contamination crisis
in Flint. The
group was appointed by
Republican Governor
Rick Snyder last year. It found
the state
is -- quote -- "fundamentally
accountable"
for letting lead taint the
city's water and
then ignoring pleas from the
public.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A son of
billionaire Warren
Buffett has unveiled a $90
million fund to
help young girls of color in the
U.S. The
foundation, run by Peter and
Jennifer Buffett,
says it's the largest single
investment of
its kind. The first step will be
to survey
minority girls and their
advocates to determine
how best to use the money.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street, a
new drop in
oil and other commodities pulled
stocks down.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
80 points to close just above
17500. The Nasdaq
fell more than 50 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped 13.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And former mayor
-- Major League
Baseball catcher and Hall of
Fame broadcaster
Joe Garagiola has died in
Scottsdale, Arizona.
He played eight seasons in the
majors, and
then for decades, he called
games on radio
and TV, and even co-hosted NBC's
"Today Show."
He finally retired in 2013. Joe
Garagiola
was 90 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Europe's
struggle to combat terror;
Bernie Sanders
on his view of America's role in
the fight
against ISIS; arguments over
covering contraception
before the Supreme Court; and
much more.
GWEN IFILL: We return to the
attacks in Brussels,
and what they said about the
growing Islamic
State threat in Europe and
elsewhere.
Daniel Benjamin was coordinator
for counterterrorism
at the State Department during
the first term
of the Obama administration.
He's now a professor
at Dartmouth College. And Joby
Warrick is
a national security
correspondent at The Washington
Post. He's also the author of
the book "Black
Flags: The Rise of ISIS."
Daniel Benjamin, was this a
nightmare scenario
that could have been foreseen?
Yesterday,
we heard people saying, this is
what we feared.
DANIEL BENJAMIN, Former State
Department Coordinator
for Counterterrorism: I think
that people
who have been watching terrorism
have been
fearing this for many years,
actually.
The recognition that Europe had
a problem
with extremism in its midst and
the recognition
that Europe hadn't taken
security arrangements
as seriously as it should have,
I think, has
been common. That observation
has been common
in the security community for
many years now.
GWEN IFILL: Joby Warrick, the
Associated Press,
among others, have been
reporting today that
there were as many as 400 people
being trained
by ISIS to carry out these
attacks in Europe.
So did they not leave any
footprints or any
signs?
JOBY WARRICK, The Washington
Post: Well, the
number's a little bit soft, I
think, but it's
not unrealistic to think that if
you have
5,000 Europeans that went to
Iraq and Syria
to fight, if only 10 percent of
them came
back home, you know, that's a
pretty good
base for future attacks.
You know, Abaaoud, the guy who
carried out
the November attacks in Paris,
claimed that
there were 90 people that he
knew of involved
in cells getting ready to carry
out attacks.
So it's not something that can
be easily dismissed.
GWEN IFILL: From what you know
about from
writing your book on ISIS, is
this the sort
of thing that the United States
should be
wary of? Are there footprints as
well leading
here?
JOBY WARRICK: Well, it's a
different situation
for us. Fortunately, we don't
have the kind
of radical communities that you
see in Europe.
We have radicalized individuals,
but not so
much a community problem.
And we also have, fortunately,
oceans separating
us from some of these jihadists.
I think Europeans
have a much more acute problem.
They're really
waking up to it now. It's almost
too late
for some of the action they're
taking, because
the threat is really at hand.
GWEN IFILL: So, Daniel Benjamin,
you agree
that this idea of alienation
makes it different
with Muslim communities or the
radical Muslim
communities in Europe and here?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: There's no
question that
there's a higher level of
alienation and of
radicalization.
European Muslims are several
times more likely
to go to fight in Iraq and
Syria, perhaps
as much as 10 times as much. And
if you look
at the -- just the casualties
that we have
seen since 9/11, you know,
there's been vastly
more violence in Europe, 10
times as much
at least, compared to the United
States, where,
despite all the concern, we have
only had
about 45 casualties, 45 deaths,
due to jihadist
violence.
GWEN IFILL: So, is it law
enforcement that
is dropping the ball in Europe?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: It's a much
larger problem
than law enforcement.
You have a very different kind
of set of Muslim
communities. They tend to be
much poorer,
much less educated. They have
much less social
mobility, much less access to
education and
even less political
representation. So, it's
really a societal problem.
It's important to note that the
large majority
of European Muslims are very,
very peaceful
and love their countries. In
fact, when polls
are taken, they tend to be more
patriotic
than the non-Muslim populations.
But, because
of these conditions, it is
easier for a smaller
number of extremists, still much
larger than
we have in the U.S., to swim in
the same seas,
if you will.
GWEN IFILL: Well, Joby Warrick,
Daniel Benjamin
mentions that there are only 45
casualties
since 2004, including Madrid and
Paris and...
DANIEL BENJAMIN: No, no, I'm
sorry. In Europe,
you have had closer to 500.
GWEN IFILL: In Europe, oh, 500.
DANIEL BENJAMIN: In the United
States, you
have had about 45.
GWEN IFILL: The other way
around, that's right.
So, making the point -- thank
you -- that
there are that many people and
that many signs,
is this something that is
operating so far
under the radar that Belgian
authorities or
Europol or French authorities
couldn't have
had a heads-up about it,
especially -- I just
want to add, especially since
President Erdogan
of Turkey today is saying that
he made a warning?
JOBY WARRICK: Well, yes, I think
the Belgians,
in particular, have a problem.
And they're
very aware of it. And we're
often saying these
days that you're only as strong
as your weakest
link.
In the case of Belgium, you have
got a country
that -- it's got a fairly small
police force.
If they have 100 -- by
conservative estimates,
about 100 ISIS veterans have
returned to that
country alone, just so the
manpower involved
in conducting surveillance and
watching all
these people, watching their
phone calls,
conversations, it sort of taxes
their police
forces beyond their capability,
not -- let
alone the problem of dealing
with counterradicalization,
and just all the tracking and
surveillance
they need to be doing.
So, yes, they have a problem
there. They have
a problem with coordinating with
other agencies
and other governments. And so,
yes, that sets
a huge problem for them. And I
think they
really are aware of this now,
but it's kind
of late to the party.
GWEN IFILL: Has the migrant
crisis that we
have seen, we have spent a lot
of time talking
about on this program, has that
exacerbated
the problem?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: It absolutely
has.
We know, for example, in the
case of the Paris
attacks, that at least one of
the perpetrators
came in with the flow of
migrants. And, you
know, it's had a pretty
destabilizing effect.
And it's quite possible -- you
spoke earlier
of a report of 400, which I find
to be really
high number of potential
infiltrators.
But, certainly, Europe has had
very weak external
borders. Its internal borders in
the Schengen
area are nonexistent, so it's
very easy for
bad actors to move around, and
the migrant
crisis has really exacerbated
things.
GWEN IFILL: Joby Warrick, what
do you think
about that?
JOBY WARRICK: Yes.
And it's obviously something
that people talk
about politically in this
country, but it's
a very different situation for
us here. There's
really much more vetting of
refugees, potential
refugees that come into this
country. It hasn't
really existed in Europe. And
now we have
got a huge problem that already
exists, and
it's in they're having to
retroactively go
back and try to figure out who
some of these
people are, and it is clear that
some bad
people came in with the rest.
GWEN IFILL: So, would you both
say that maybe
the root of this is more likely
to be the
civil war in Syria than because
of this, or
the civil war in Syria, which is
exacerbating,
which is causing the migrant
crisis and also
causing this kind of
radicalization?
DANIEL BENJAMIN: So, there is
multiple causality.
Certainly, the Syrian civil war
has made a
huge difference and had a
profound effect
on radicalizing people who have
wanted to
go to Syria and fight to defend
Sunni Muslims
who they found were being
treated appallingly,
as we have seen.
At the same time, you know,
security services
in Europe for the most part --
and their bureaucracies
in general -- never had that
catalytic moment
that we had after 9/11, and they
have never
removed their stovepipes. They
really forced themselves to
cooperate as well.
There are times in the U.S.
government when
you would find that part of a
particular foreign
European government had one set
of information,
but didn't want another part to
know, but
we knew. And, you know, it's a
remarkable
situation, but, really, until
you have one
of these horrific attacks, there
isn't a sufficient
prod to reorganize.
GWEN IFILL: Daniel Benjamin of
Dartmouth College,
and Joby Warrick, author of the
book "Black
Flags: The Rise of ISIS," thank
you both very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
today said
the U.S. stands with Belgium and
other European
allies. But, at the same time,
she called
for more European countries to
invest in security.
In a speech at Stanford
University, she also
slammed the Republicans'
response to the terror
attacks in Brussels.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
In our fight against radical
jihadism, we
have to do what actually works.
One thing we know that doesn't
work is offensive,
inflammatory rhetoric that
demonizes all Muslims.
There are millions of
peace-loving Muslims
living, working, raising
families and paying
taxes in this country. These
Americans are
a crucial line of defense
against terrorism.
They are the most likely to
recognize the
warning signs of radicalization
before it's
too late, and the best
positioned to block
it.
So, when Republican candidates
like Ted Cruz
call for treating American
Muslims like criminals
and for racially profiling
predominantly Muslim
neighborhoods, it's wrong, it's
counterproductive,
it's dangerous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more now on
the terrorist
attacks in Belgium, U.S. foreign
policy and
the race for the White House, we
turn to the
other Democratic presidential
candidate, Vermont
Senator Bernie Sanders.
Senator Sanders, welcome. And,
first of all,
congratulations on your wins
yesterday in
Utah and Idaho.
I know you know, as the voters
were going
to the polls in those states,
though, on the
other side of the Atlantic, the
city of Brussels
was reeling from this terrible
set of terrorist
attacks.
Secretary Clinton said just a
short time ago
that ISIS cannot be contained;
it has to be
defeated.
Do you agree? And, if so, how?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I think it has to be
destroyed.
This is a barbaric organization
that is a
threat not only to the people in
the Middle
East, to the people in Europe,
but obviously
to the people in the United
States as well.
It has to be destroyed.
And here is how we destroy it.
We do not destroy
it by doing what we did in Iraq
and getting
into perpetual warfare. I voted
against the
war in Iraq. In fact, Secretary
Clinton, when
she was in the Senate, voted for
that war.
What we do, as King Abdullah of
Jordan has
told us, is we work to put
together a very
effective coalition of Muslim
nations who
lead the effort on the ground,
supported by
the United States, the U.K.,
France, and other
major powers in the air and
through training.
Now, in the last year, we have
had some success.
Ramadi has been recaptured. ISIS
has lost
about 20 percent of the ground
that it controlled.
But we have a lot more to do.
So, I think
what we need is strong
coalition.
And, by the way, Judy -- and
very few people
talk about this -- we have got
to bring in
some of the Gulf region
countries who have
kind of sat it out, countries
like Qatar,
one of the wealthiest countries
on earth,
who are spending $200 billion in
preparation
for the World Cups in 2022.
They're spending $200 billion
for the World
Cup. Well, they may want to
spend some money
helping us destroy ISIS. Saudi
Arabia, the
UAE, Kuwait are going to have to
play a greater
role.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Senator, as
the United
States waits for these other
countries to
get on board to form this
coalition, ISIS
is not only strong in its base
in Iraq and
Syria. It's now sending, we
know, hundreds
of fighters into Europe, the AP
reporting
today 400 trained fighters
planing attacks
in Europe.
That's going on right now.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Right, and
that raises
the other issue.
First of all, we have got to
destroy ISIS.
Second of all, we have got to
protect the
United States from attacks and
protect our
allies throughout the world. And
that means
we need to do a much greater job
in sharing
intelligence. We need to do a
much better
job in monitoring those young
people who are
being drawn into terrorism.
We have got to monitor how they
communicate
with each other to plan attacks.
So, there
is a lot of work to be done to
protect our
country, as well as to protect
our allies
in Europe and elsewhere, by the
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how do you do
that, when
there are people right now in
Europe, in Belgium,
and other countries and
presumably here in
the United States who are
prepared to die
for this cause?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Well, Judy,
no one ever
said that this is going to be
simple.
What we have got to do is work
with increased
intelligence capabilities,
shared intelligence
capabilities. We have to work
with increased
law enforcement, with increased
monitoring,
with increased tracking of
people who come
into this country. This is not
easy. Your
point is right.
If somebody is willing to blow
themselves
up and walk into an airport, or
walk into
a movie theater, you know what?
It is tough
to defend ourselves against
that. But, obviously,
we must do everything that we
can.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I don't
understand how
you destroy ISIS, to use your
word, when you're
talking about intelligence
operations and
cooperation and coalitions.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: You don't
understand
how we destroy ISIS?
We destroy ISIS because there
are millions
of soldiers in the Middle East
who are under
arms right now. ISIS has perhaps
30,000 or
40,000 fighters. Our goal is to
bring those
countries together, to put
troops on the ground
to destroy ISIS, not to get the
United States
involved in perpetual warfare.
Can ISIS be destroyed? Of course
they can.
It's a question of a coalition.
It's a question,
as King Abdullah has said,
Muslim troops on
the ground, not American troops.
And, by the
way, it is not a question of
going to war
against a religion, as some of
my Republican
colleagues would have us do.
We're taking
on terrorism and ISIS, not Islam
as a religion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But to play
devil's advocate,
just one more question here,
Senator. The
approach you describe is one
that is going
to take many months, maybe even
many years.
Does the United States...
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Well, you
know, Judy,
I don't know -- let me tell you
this, also,
Judy. I don't know how we can
stop somebody
who has an assault weapon from
shooting up
some people today.
These are not easy answers.
You're right.
This is difficult. And anyone
who tells you
they have a magical solution to
this problem
is not telling you the truth.
But the two-pronged
attack -- two-pronged approach
has got to
be, number one, we do destroy
ISIS on the
ground in Iraq and in that
region.
Number two, we do everything
possible to defend
the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Senator
Sanders, a question
about the path to the
nomination.
You do have right now over 900
delegates.
But even the most optimistic,
realistic scenario
shows that it's very difficult
for you, going
to be very difficult for you to
overcome,
to overtake Secretary Clinton.
Do you still believe that it is
possible for
you to accumulate the number of
delegates
you need to capture the
Democratic nomination?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Well, Judy,
let's start
off by remembering maybe a
discussion you
and I might have had 10 months
ago when I
began.
At that point, I was 3 percent
in the polls,
70 points behind Hillary
Clinton. CBS had
a poll this week had me five
points behind.
And what Democrats all over this
country are
taking notice of is that, in
virtually every
national poll, I defeat Donald
Trump by significantly
greater numbers than does
Secretary Clinton.
So, what Democrats are
understanding and what
superdelegates are understanding
that, really,
the most important thing right
now is to make
sure we don't have some
Republican in the
White House. And I think people
are taking
a second look at Bernie Sanders,
because,
clearly, he is the stronger
candidate to defeat
Donald Trump.
Now, in terms of how the
electoral process
has gone on, Secretary Clinton
did very, very
well in the Deep South. We
didn't do well.
She got a whole lot of
delegates. Well, you
know, what? We're moving out of
the Deep South
now.
Just yesterday, as you know, we
got almost
80 percent of the vote in Idaho
and Utah.
We won Democrats aboard with 67
percent. This
weekend, we're heading to
Washington, Hawaii,
Alaska. I can't predict the
outcomes. I hope
we do very well.
You have major states like New
York state,
New Jersey, California, Oregon
coming up.
We think we have a chance to do
very, very
well there. So, we have come
from way, way,
way back. And I think very few
people would
have thought that a Bernie
Sanders and our
campaign and what we're talking
about would
have won 12 contests already.
But we do believe we have a path
to the White
House, and it is through the
West.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still very much
in the fight.
Senator Bernie Sanders, we thank
you.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Thank you
very much.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
sex trafficking
of young girls has moved online;
and listen
up, the latest songs and sounds
added to the
Library of Congress.
But, first, we turn to the
Supreme Court,
where the clash between
religious freedom
and women's access to birth
control played
out once again today.
PROTESTERS: Hands off my birth
control!
GWEN IFILL: Today marked the
fourth time the
high court has heard a challenge
to the president's
signature health care law.
At the center of today's case,
the Affordable
Care Act's contraceptive
mandate. Just two
years ago, arts and crafts chain
Hobby Lobby
challenged that mandate, and
won. Justices
ruled that family-owned
companies run on religious
principles could refuse to pay
for their employees'
birth control.
Today's case shifted the focus
from private
companies to the potential
burden for religious
nonprofits. The challenge comes
in part from
an order of nuns, the Little
Sisters of the
Poor. Along with six other
plaintiffs, they
argue the law forces them to
either violate
their beliefs or pay a
substantial fine.
MOTHER LORAINE MARIE MAGUIRE,
Little Sisters
of the Poor: We find ourselves
in a situation
where the government is
requiring us to make
changes in our health care, our
religious
health care plan to include
services that
really violate our deepest-held
religious
beliefs as Little Sisters.
GWEN IFILL: The National Women's
Law Center
sided with the Obama
administration, saying
coverage alternatives for these
groups already
exist.
GRETCHEN BORCHELT, National
Women's Law Center:
Women deserve insurance coverage
for birth
control no matter where they
work. These employers
want to take that benefit away
from their
employees. The alternatives that
they proposed
in court today are unworkable
and, frankly,
insulting.
GWEN IFILL: A ruling is expected
by June.
For more on today's arguments,
we turn to
our "NewsHour" regular Marcia
Coyle of "The
National Law Journal." She was,
as always,
in the court today.
It seems like we had a
discussion about morality
at the Supreme Court, Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Yes, because the religious
nonprofits that
have brought these cases -- and
there are
seven cases -- to the Supreme
Court feel that
the government's attempt to
accommodate their
objections is making them
complicit in immoral,
sinful conduct.
GWEN IFILL: So, how did this end
up back at
the court? Because we have --
the court has
ruled on this, on Obamacare
before, a couple
times now.
MARCIA COYLE: Oh, yes.
In fact, this is the fourth time
the court's
looked at the law. But this is
-- it really
involves health regulations
under the Affordable
Care Act, and there are -- there
have been
dozens and dozens of lawsuits by
religious
nonprofits almost from the
beginning of the
enactment of the Affordable Care
Act.
GWEN IFILL: Including
universities and schools.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right.
It is not just Little Sisters of
the Poor
even before the Supreme Court.
There are religious-affiliated
colleges. There are Roman
Catholic diocese
and some clergy who are also
party to these
cases.
GWEN IFILL: So what are the
other options?
What is the compromise that the
administration
was offering?
MARCIA COYLE: The administration
has told
the religious nonprofits to
simply write a
letter to the Department of
Health and Human
Services notifying the
department of their
objections, and also to give the
department
the name of their health insurer
or their
third-party administrator.
The religious nonprofits say
they are not
objecting to objecting, but they
claim that
by providing the name of their
insurer or
third-party administrator,
they're allowing
the government to hijack their
insurance plan
and provide the coverage to
their employees
that they object to. And this
makes them complicit
in that coverage.
GWEN IFILL: And, in fact,
Justice -- Chief
Justice Roberts used that word
hijacked today.
Tell us about how this played
out in front
of the court.
MARCIA COYLE: Chief Justice
Roberts and Justice
Alito in particular were the
most aggressive
questioners of the solicitor
general of the
United States defending the
accommodation
in this case.
And Chief Justice Roberts said
he thought
that hijacking was an accurate
description
of what's happening here. But
the solicitor
general told the justices that
it's not accurate.
He said that these insurance
plans do not
belong to the employers. They
belong to the
insurers.
And the government has always
had the ability
to make arrangements with third
parties. And,
in this case, the government
would arrange
with the insurer to provide the
contraceptive
coverage in a separate
agreement, separate
communications, and segregated
funds. The
employer is entirely out of it.
GWEN IFILL: Now, we know, of
course, that
last time there was a challenge
to the Affordable
Care Act involving the Hobby
Lobby case, Justice
Scalia was still alive, still a
nine-member
court.
MARCIA COYLE: That's correct.
GWEN IFILL: With the 4-4 split,
what did you
discern from the arguments today
about how
that's going to turn out?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, my sense is
-- as I left
the courtroom, is that the court
is evenly
divided.
If the government wants to win a
ruling for
the entire nation, it's going to
need somebody
from the conservative side to
move over to
the liberal side, so that there
would be a
5-3 majority. The most likely
person often
is Justice Kennedy. But he gave
conflicting
signals during the argument, but
he also did
pick up the hijacking language.
So it's not clear to me how this
is going
to come out. I would say, Gwen,
that this
court doesn't like 4-4
decisions. It's a waste
of everybody's time. It doesn't
create a precedent.
And it leaves uneven law
throughout the country.
GWEN IFILL: But if it were to
happen in this
case, what stands?
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
OK, the lower court's opinion
stands. Now,
in these seven cases, four
federal appellate
courts have ruled for the
government. An additional
three appellate courts ruled for
the government.
One has not. So, in the states
where the government
won, the employers have to
comply.
GWEN IFILL: OK. It's
complicated.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: I'm sorry to throw
that at you
at the last minute.
Marcia Coyle of "The National
Law Journal,"
thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a
disturbing new trend
in the trafficking of mostly
young women and
children into the sex trade.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports
from the Philippines on what
police call cyber-trafficking.
It's part of his ongoing series
Agents for
Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Sex tourism
has long been
a scourge in the Philippines, an
industry
that thrives on trafficked human
beings and
deep poverty in this nation of
100 million.
Recent studies have shown that
anywhere from
100 to more than 300 thousand
Filipinos are
trafficked each year; 80
percent, four out
of five, are under the age of
18.
The government, under
international pressure,
has stepped up enforcement.
Stings like this
one to rescue young women are
more common,
as are arrests and convictions.
But the sex
trafficking industry, as always,
seems a step
ahead in the game.
It has expanded online.
IVY CASTILLO, Police Officer:
That's only
one but there are a lot.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: At the
police cyber-crime
center, officer Ivy Castillo
explained one
of the many ways that vulnerable
young women
are tricked into the trade.
IVY CASTILLO: This is a fake
account.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Modeling is
a common lure.
So, they're pretending that this
is a real
modeling agency to entrap the
young girls?
It has all the trappings of a
glamorous fashion
model agency, especially to a
young rural
Filipina girl.
IVY CASTILLO: At first, they are
requested
to send this image.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They're
asked to submit
pictures that seem innocuous,
facial shots,
ostensibly part of the selection
process.
IVY CASTILLO: The next
requirement is with
a two-piece.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The next
steps call for
more revealing images, just the
torso, not
the face, they're assured,
giving the false
impression that it's
unidentifiable. The young
woman won't make the connection
that computer
software will, until it's too
late.
They have got her face from her
previous,
more innocent images, and have
Photoshopped
them with the nude ones.
IVY CASTILLO: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In no time,
they are shamed
and blackmailed into working for
the opaque
criminal networks behind the
trade.
Lila Shahani is on a government
task force
on human trafficking.
LILA SHAHANI, Human Trafficking
Task Force:
Cyber-pornography is easily one
of our biggest
problems. It's proliferated very
quickly.
and it's an expensive thing to
police, and
we're a Third World country.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But it's an
industry fueled
by First World demand, from
pedophiles mostly
in Europe, North America, and
Australia, says
officer Castillo.
IVY CASTILLO: These foreign
perpetrators,
they have contacts here in the
Philippines,
wherein these contacts are
looking for children.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And perhaps
the most frustrating
challenge with this cyber-sex
industry is
a social one. Cecilia Oebanda,
who founded
the Philippines' largest
anti-trafficking
group, says many people don't
believe or don't
want to believe it's that
harmful.
CECILIA FLORES-OEBANDA,
Anti-Trafficking Activist:
Because they think that they're
-- the girls
are just actually performing in
the computer,
and there's no contact, there is
no touch.
For them, it's OK. There's no
harm actually
put to the child.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: At a shelter
her agency
runs is living proof that it's
not just emotionally
abusive, but also frequently
escalates. The
children are invariably inducted
into traditional
prostitution and its daily
physical abuse.
These two 15-year-olds were
rescued in a police
sting from a cyber-porn racket.
Their alleged
pimp, a man named Jerrie Arraz
began as a
good samaritan neighbor.
GIRL (through translator): There
was a time
when my mother need money
because my stepfather
was in jail. So she asked Jerrie
for help.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Her mother:
WOMAN (through translator): He
was really
kind. When we didn't have food,
he gave us
food. Jerrie offered to send
Gina to school.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: This young
woman is the
11th of 12 children in a family
from one of
the many rural Philippine
islands beset by
poverty and often natural
disasters.
Opportunities are scarce, so, at
12, the offer
of a scholarship from a kindly
stranger, a
man visiting to her village, was
hard to resist.
GIRL (through translator): He
said that he's
from Manila. So, I would say my
dream is to
study in Manila and to know the
people, to
-- like, to wear nice clothes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She
accompanied the man
to Manila, and was placed with
Arraz, with
whom he was apparently
associated. She was
in fact placed in school, but,
gradually,
there were demands, and they
escalated, to
display herself before strangers
online, then
to perform sexually and with
Arraz in front
of the camera.
GIRL (through translator): He
would wake me
up to say there was a customer
online and
he wanted us to perform while
the customer
was watching. Each time, it
happened, I just
cried.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In time, the
cyber-sex
had escalated to plain old
prostitution.
GIRL (through translator): In a
month, about
four to five times, we met with
foreign customers
in a hotel, plus daily online.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It was when
both girls
were in a hotel one day that
Arraz was nabbed
as he negotiated with two
undercover detectives
posing as customers.
JONATHAN LLEDO, Prosecutor:
There were Caucasian
-- Caucasian undercover agents.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Prosecutor
Jonathan Lledo
was on the sting team, one of
whose members
hid in waiting.
JONATHAN LLEDO: He was inside
the closet for
four hours.
And the phone call rung that
signaled that
money exchanged hands. And we
opened the door
and announced. There was
bewilderment. There
was: What is happening here?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The young
women, in terror,
ran to their trafficker and to
his defense.
GIRL (through translator): We
always felt
like Jerrie was our father, so
that's what
we told rescuers. He is our
father. We were
really scared.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It's been
called the Stockholm
syndrome, Lledo says, one more
complication
in rescuing hostages who become
sympathetic
to their captor, and any change
to what has
become normal in their lives is
unsettling.
JONATHAN LLEDO: The trafficker
is providing
them with food, clothing,
shelter and a place
to stay, and law enforcement
will disrupt
all this.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As it turns
out, six children
were removed from the home of
Jerrie Arraz
and placed with Oebanda's
agency, including
a 1-year-old infant abandoned by
its mother.
The more immediate task is to
try to restore
childhoods through counseling
and eventually
adoption into homes, education
and skills
training for those older.
IVY CASTILLO: Most of our cases
are referred
from our foreign counterparts.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Philippine
police officials
say most of the enforcement
comes from the
consumer end. Tracking down
providers is fraught
with difficulty. They can be
anywhere, evidence
against them, if it exists,
hidden in the
cloud instead of a hard drive.
A lot of bad guys are not being
caught, right?
IVY CASTILLO: Yes.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Another big
challenge
is that police must rely on tips
from the
public, says task force member
Shahani.
LILA SHAHANI: There is a real
fear of -- among
informants of retaliation from
big syndicates.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But Oebanda,
who has long
campaigned against trafficking,
sees progress.
CECILIA FLORES OEBANDA: Our
conviction rate
has more than double. So, for
me, that progress
is indications of the political
will.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Attention is
now on Jerrie
Arraz's trial, now under way in
Manila. These
images are from his Facebook
page. It's the
first so-called
cyber-trafficking case to
be brought, in hopes that it
will mark a turning
point.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Manila.
GWEN IFILL: Now to a "NewsHour"
essay.
Earlier in the week, we heard
what it was
like to live through the wave of
terrorism
in Turkey from Elliot Ackerman,
a decorated
Marine veteran in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and
author of the new novel "Green
on Blue."
Tonight, Ackerman examines the
legacy of a
revolution and the deep wounds,
but often
strong bonds forged by war.
ELLIOT ACKERMAN, Author, "Green
on Blue":
Five years ago this past
December, the Arab
Spring started when a Tunisian
street vendor,
Mohamed Bouazizi, poured a can
of gasoline
over his head and lit himself on
fire.
He was protesting a corrupt
government official's
seizure of his fruit cart and
scales. In the
months that followed across
Egypt, Libya,
Yemen, and, most disastrously,
Syria, revolution
spread.
Today, there is no revolution
left in the
Arab world, only war. Yet, the
revolutionaries
remain. They are particularly
prevalent among
Syria's growing diaspora. When
the Arab Spring
began, I was in Afghanistan on
my last deployment,
ending combat service that had
started in
Iraq seven years before.
And instead of returning home, I
returned
to the Middle East, writing
about the conflict
in Syria from Turkey's southern
border. Working
as a journalist, I believed at
first that
my experience as a Marine in
America's unpopular
wars would prove a liability
when speaking
to former revolutionaries.
Slowly, thanks to close Syrian
friends, what
I found was quite the opposite.
A bond existed
between us. And this surprised
me. One of
these friends was Abed, an
activist from Damascus
now living in Southern Turkey.
Proud as Abed was of his role as
an organizer
in the 2011 protests, he felt
deeply conflicted
about his participation. Abed
believed in
the revolution's ideals. He
still did, yet
he couldn't deny that the very
forces of change
he helped unleash created a
power vacuum exploited
by extremists like the Islamic
State.
Sipping tea or having dinner on
any given
night, Abed would begin by
asserting that
the revolution wasn't over,
that, despite
setbacks, hope still existed for
democracy
inside Syria. But by the time
each evening
drew to a close, he would often
despair: "I
wish we had never taken to the
streets. I
have destroyed my home."
Abed's inability to reconcile
what his revolution
hoped to achieve with its
outcome felt familiar
to me. When it comes to
America's wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan, I feel
almost exactly
the same conflict.
In addition to rooting out
al-Qaida and the
Taliban in Afghanistan, and
searching for
WMD in Iraq, our nation sent me
and countless
others who volunteered to bring
freedoms and
democracy to those who had lived
under violent,
autocratic regimes for decades.
Yes, it seems naive to say now,
but that was
one of the goals then. Just as
the Syrian
revolution resulted in a power
vacuum filled
by international jihadists, so,
too, did the
U.S.-led wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
As my friendship with Abed grew,
we began
to speak about the parallel
trajectories of
our disillusionment, how
high-minded ideals
bogged down in the quagmire of
Islamist dogma
and sectarian bloodshed.
After I had known Abed for about
a year, he
invited me to his wedding. The
summer before
the revolution, he had met a
Swiss woman,
a university student studying in
Damascus.
They would be married just
outside Geneva
at the Abbey Debeve (ph) along
the banks of
Lake Neuchatel.
A few days before the ceremony,
Abed called
and asked if I would serve as
his witness.
We had become close, but his
request was a
surprise. Yet, when I arrived at
the chapel,
it made sense. The bride's
family and friends
filled the pews, but with Abed's
family trapped
in Damascus, I represented the
entirety of
the groom's party.
As the wedding started, there
were four of
us, the maid of honor, the
bride, Abed, and
me, on a single pew. The civil
ceremony was
in French, which Abed does not
speak, and
his bride leaned toward him,
quietly whispering
a translation.
As Abed struggled to understand
his vows,
he glanced over to me now and
again, plaintively,
as if apologizing that I cannot
understand
either.
That a former American Marine
should serve
as the sole witness to a new
life embarked
upon by a former Syrian activist
felt appropriate.
My wars and his revolution had
left a wake
of destruction, forcing both of
us to craft
new lives from the wreckage.
Sitting next to my friend, it
didn't seem
to matter that he couldn't
understand the
particulars of his vows. What
mattered was
the choice he had made, to start
again.
GWEN IFILL: And finally, our
"NewsHour" shares
of the night, something that
caught our eye
-- actually, in this case,
caught our ear.
Each year, the Library of
Congress designates
25 sound recordings for
posterity and preservation.
See if your picks match theirs.
Jeffrey Brown has a sample.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a trip
through the 20th
century, with something for
everyone, including
plenty of romance, from a 1911
recording by
the Columbia Quartet of "Let Me
Call You Sweetheart"
to Julie London's version of
"Cry Me a River"
in 1955.
A year later came the jazz
standard "Mack
the Knife" with this performance
by Louis
Armstrong. And nearly a decade
later, the
Motown hit "Where Did Our Love"
go by the
Supremes, a song the trio
initially thought
was too simplistic, but helped
gained them
great fame.
Also among the 25 recordings are
important
speeches. Here is George
Marshall in 1947
outlining the plan to restore
Europe after
World War II.
GEORGE MARSHALL, U.S. Army Chief
of Staff:
It is logical that the United
States should
do whatever is able to do to
assist in the
return of normal economic health
in the world,
without which there can be no
political stability
and no assured peace.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then a bit of
basketball
history: the only surviving
recording of Wilt
Chamberlain scoring 100 points
in 1962. It
was taped off the radio by a
fan.
MAN: They stopped the game.
People are running
out onto the court, 100 points
for Wilt Chamberlain!
JEFFREY BROWN: Back to music,
and you knew
it had to be there, Gloria
Gaynor's 1978 anthem
"I Will Survive."
And last, but -- well, you
decide -- some
heavy metal from 1986,
Metallica's "Master
of Puppets."
From the audio time capsule, I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK, Gloria Gaynor
and the Supremes.
GWEN IFILL: She was singing it,
I swear. She
was singing along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was trying.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: I'm all for "Cry Me
a River" and
Wilt.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen
Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.